good day I'm Ellen far for KPFK news and
public affairs our guest is Christopher
Simpson and he's the author of a new
book called blowback America's
recruitment of Nazis and its effect on
the Cold War I want to ask you
Christopher just to begin with the story
of America's recruitment of Nazis is one
that comes in bits and pieces to those
of us on the west coast 3,000 miles away
from the center of information basically
but it comes to us in bits and pieces
and we were first made aware of the
subject at least I was through the
iran-contra hearings and some background
materially I received on the Reinhardt
Galen organization an intelligence
network that got lifted if you will out
of the young out of the German
Republican to into the American service
1945 and eventually became the the key
to a lot of America's intelligence
information concerning the Soviets in
the in the Cold War period where did the
story begin for you about America's
recruitment of Nazis well some of the
first research stemmed from a case that
was here in California the Department of
Justice was attempting to deport a man
by the name of Otto von bullsh--
weighing this as maybe six eight years
ago from bulging was a SS veteran Nazi
Party veteran and he had been involved
in a pogrom in Bucharest Romania in
which about 600 people had been murdered
Yvonne ball swings defense against the
attempt to deport him was essentially
you can't deport me the CIA brought me
to America and this caught my attention
and when I began to look into this case
I discovered that there were a number of
other similar cases how easy has been
your access to this kind of information
you've discovered there been a number of
similar cases how easy has your access
has the fya been central to this the FOI
a the Freedom of Information Act is a
very important law it's an imperfect law
but nonetheless has been very helpful in
this the
sess has been I guess by world standards
pretty easy it's certainly easier to get
this type of information in the United
States than in most other countries
however no the government didn't didn't
make it easy to do this
many of the government files have been
purged many remain classified some of
the government files you can tell were
created in the first place to be cover
stories and see why a memorandum if you
in bureaucratese its cover your butt
type of memorandums the way the the most
effective research technique for for
coming to understand how the Nazi
recruitment programs worked and their
effect on America was almost like a
mosaic or assembly of a jigsaw puzzle in
which you are not sure even what the
picture of the jigsaw puzzle is but
basically a one technique that that
worked very well is you you take a State
Department documentation on a given
subject and then you compare it with the
Pentagon's documentation then you
compare it with the Army's documentation
and and so on down the line and if you
do this carefully and systematically
after a while a picture starts to emerge
were you in California at the time of
the von bolt swing because in part yes
yes I came out here and I did some
interviewing and some research and and
so forth how did you become interested
in the subject generally if that was one
of the catalysts well you know I'm a
child of one generation I was born and
they had the McCarthy hearings on wasps
in my cradle and in grade school there
was a Kennedy assassination and high
school was Vietnam and a little bit
later there was Watergate the the issues
of intelligence and the role of
intelligence in in our society is a
central theme of American politics for
the last thirty years so you went back
to look at some of the roots of this the
National Security Act of 1947 of course
creates the Central Intelligence Agency
the ashes of the old Office of Strategic
Services and you went back to look at
the roots of this and the book begins
with a marvelous press conference held
by the Department of Justice concerning
Klaus Barbie but what I would like to do
if you will is start back with the
German invasion of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republic it's it's necessary
to at least start at at that phase if
not earlier in understanding what what
transpired here
the Nazis declared war on the USSR and
there was a blitzkrieg type invasion
their original plan was to conquer the
USSR in literally a matter of months and
for a time it looked like they might
actually succeed at it in the areas that
the Germans occupied they set up a
variety of different types of Quisling
governments that were staffed by the
local collaborators in in those areas
and they came complete with mayor's
chiefs of police policemen militia
forces and so forth all of whom played a
very important role in stabilizing or
temporarily stabilizing Nazi power in
the occupied areas they also played a
very important role in a variety of mass
murder campaigns most particularly
directed at Jews but also directed at
other nationality groups and other
political criminals or so-called
criminals in the Nazis eyes in the
Soviet Union these people these
collaborators were responsible for mele
quite extraordinary crimes involving
massacring a million people in a matter
of months and this is a pretty difficult
thing to do it just from a simply
logistic standpoint even you know not
considering the ethics involved well
what happened is that the Germans were
themselves divided over how to use these
quislings and collaborators and there
are different arguments among the Nazis
as to the best way to make use of these
people so there were much comings and
goings and factional struggles
the types of relationship between the
the collaborationist groups and berlin
and and those factional struggles
incidentally became important later I'll
give you an example say for example a
Ukrainian nationalist organization Oh UN
okay
now during the opening months of the
Nazi invasion of the USSR there was open
collaboration between the oun and the
Nazis the oun the Ukraine is a part of
the Soviet Union which is ethnically
distinct and there's been a long history
of resistance and discontent both the
during the Czarist period and during the
post 1917 period between the Ukraine on
the one hand and the central government
in Moscow on the other hand okay
during the opening months of the
invasion the Nazis had the UN activists
on their payroll and they set them up as
policemen and governors and and mayors
and so forth inside the occupation zone
well the oun saw itself as the
government of an independent axis
fascist country that would be equal with
Germany in the same sense that Hungary
was allied with Germany or Italy well
the Nazis had a racial view of the world
in which Slavic peoples of Ukrainians
are a Slavic nationality group are only
about a half a step higher than Jewish
people and certainly underneath the
Nazis at least as the Nazis you know the
Nazi Aryans would have it okay so once
the utility of the oun for illustrating
to the world that supposedly the Soviets
had warmly welcomed that the people the
Soviet Union had supposedly warmly
welcomed the German invasion because the
the oun was there with bread and salt
and so forth to welcome the Nazis in
once that phase had passed well then the
Nazis double-crossed the oun it's
because they had no intention of letting
them be a and into
fascist country and so the oun was to a
certain degree driven underground and at
that stage there was a there was a more
complicated relationship between the
Germans and the ouu Oh un the point here
is that there were very intricate and
changing relationships between the the
Imperial that you know the dominant
country Nazi Germany and its various
minor allies who would sometimes be in
favor sometimes out of favor after the
war these people are at the end of the
war these people retreat the
collaborators retreated back to Nazi
Germany with the retreating German
forces at the end of the war the
Americans looked at many of these
collaborationist groups and concluded
that well there of Soviet nationality
are one of the Soviet nationalities they
speak the language they have a certain
amount of expertise about life in the
Soviet Union they have intelligence
information so forth and so on well
we'll get them on our team will hire
them will protect them and so forth this
the same groups that had collaborated
with Berlin and the the the rationale
was to use these people as a
psychological warfare operatives in a
different types of covert operations
sabotage guerrilla warfare and so so
forth aimed at the Soviets we'll get to
that it's clear that the British the
United States the French and the
Russians all view a lot of these Slavic
people's as quote assets unquote I'll
use that word in sort of the CIA view of
native peoples but we learn in the
chapter that you've done called
slaughter on the Eastern Front we learn
about a group called the Alsace raiding
team mm-hmm and it is charged among
other things with extracting both assets
in terms of human expertise and minerals
and valuable papers it's charged with
extracting elements of the German atomic
program to the United States and I want
to look at that because this is the the
view this is where if if people are
aware of
America's recruitment of Nazis this is
perhaps where the general knowledge
begins the recruitment of figures like a
Verna von Braun and vaulter done
dornberger into the Ameri into America's
rocket program so if you will okay
the business with the German scientists
is reasonably well known you know
there's a there's a whole popular
consciousness about it and the important
one important thing to understand about
how this worked is that there's
different kinds of Nazis there's just
different degrees of responsibility for
the Nazis crimes that people have now or
nirvan Braun always presented himself as
being oh well I'm just a technician I
had to no responsibility for the
Holocaust I had no responsibility for
you know the more terrible Nazi crimes
and there is a certain measure of truth
in his claim but there's also another
side to the von braun's story that it's
important to understand in order to get
a full picture of von Braun was given an
honorary membership in the SS for ten
years he was an honorary member of the
Nazi Party perhaps more important he
would use these honors quote-unquote if
being an SS man is to is an honor to
advance his career to get funding for
his projects to rise higher in the
bureaucracy now here's a guy who worked
as a technician and a scientist on a
program that whose the Rockets were
constructed by slave laborers that were
housed in the North housing
concentration camp about 20,000 human
beings were work to death yet Nordhausen
during the course of this rocket program
now von Braun or his defenders would
insist that he had no control over these
slave laborers maybe so that can be
debated but here nonetheless is a man
who was willing to walk across a
concentration camp full of corpses in
order to advance his career in order to
rise higher in the Nazi bureaucracy now
this doesn't make him a war criminal
perhaps but it certainly doesn't make
him a hero now after the war von Braun
was singled out as the kind of German
that
the Americans wanted to have on on their
team and by the way it's important to
note that the other powers in the region
the British the French the Soviets were
also systematically recruiting German
specialists German scientists of various
types and many of the other German
scientists had records more or less
similar to von braun's the scientists
became the the point of a wedge that
opened up a variety of bureaucratic
procedures secret bureaucratic
bureaucratic procedures in the American
intelligence agencies and also
psychological rationalizations if you
will about why it was in America's
interest to supposedly use - to use
Nazis for various intelligence projects
the scientists were less compromised by
their service to Nazi Germany than
certain other groups and so they became
kind of the the first the camels nose in
the tent Wyden Feld Nicholson is the
publisher of a new book called blowback
America's recruitment of Nazis and its
effects on the Cold War I'm Alan van for
KPFK we're talking with Christopher
Simpson author of blowback this
recruitment of scientists and experts
developed into a full fledge if you will
immigration program
well I'm sorry there were full fledged
immigration programs to follow let's
just call this a special immigration
program it first became known as project
overcast and then Project Paperclip I
think sure and what let's discuss if you
will what role US agencies military
largely army and army agencies had in
developing these these recruitment
programs okay two things first of all
where they came from and kind of where
they went to they at the beginning this
was and beginning here I'm talking about
1944 1945 these were basically an
expanded form of interrogation of POWs
right we had captured these German
scientists and we were interrogating
them as we might interrogate any other
military POWs but gradually they
transform themselves and chained
and and became not so much interrogation
of POWs but recruitment of POWs German
highly specialized German technicians
for a variety of US military programs
chemical warfare electronics rockets a
course of the best-known submarine
warfare different types of tank armor
and these types of technologies but
perhaps more important in the present
context than these scientists is the
step that that this provided towards
recruitment of intelligence agents you
see in in Nazi Germany most of the
intelligence complex was a run as part
of the Schutzstaffel
or SS which is the police structure of
nazi germany and the people who were in
charge of intelligence on the soviet
union were the same people who had
participated in the mass murder squads
during the opening months of the
invasion and in fact the SS would send
some of its best officers quote-unquote
best to the eastern front specifically
to participate in mass murder missions
as a means of hardening themselves
against the bloodshed which was in the
Nazi view a particular form of virtue so
that these same guys who had been
involved in the mass murder programs
became Nazi Germany's intelligence
experts on the Soviet Union and those
people were scientists of a tube
scientists - of a sword at least in the
eyes of some Western intelligence
specialists so we wanted to recruit them
in somewhat the same way that the more
hard science types the physicists were
being recruited but while the the
criminality of the scientists of the
rocket scientists is more open to debate
and more complicated the criminality of
the people who took part in the mass
murder missions is very clear-cut and
what so when we hired the Nazi Germany's
intelligence complex we brought we
inevitably hired war criminals one of
the people key to that of course is
Reinhard Galen but before we look at the
Nazi intelligence network
and gaylen's offering to the united
states was one of which was titled the
Russian High Command and its concept of
strategy I want to look with you
Christopher at the definition of war
criminal I I I think we have here a
concept which in the popular mind may be
fairly clear-cut but which which evolves
into a different notion entirely because
as the use of Nazis becomes more
widespread it's the definition of war
criminal itself changes and that's one
of the concerns which the evolution of
this definition that we have to be
concerned about yeah the basic
articulation of this came in a
particular law in that was in instituted
by the Allies in 1945
that's called Allied Control Council law
number 10 and and I'll read some parts
of this to you first of all it talks
about crimes against humanity and that's
defined as this quote atrocities and
offenses including but not limited to
murder extermination enslavement
deportation imprisonment torture rape
other inhuman human acts committed
against and this is an important part a
civilian population or persecutions on
racial political or religious grounds
then there are other provisions there's
a term war crimes and that includes many
of these same types of things but when
they are committed by an army in
occupying army against the civilian
population and then finally there's
something termed crimes against peace
which basically are is the waging of an
aggressive war in violation of a treaty
now this may sound like a kind of a lot
of legal details but the important thing
to understand about it is that there was
a statutory basis for the prosecution of
Nazi war criminals in the wake of the
war this was not simply a matter of
revenge or getting even with the Germans
or something like that this was a
civilized response to the extraordinary
criminality of Nazi Germany
I can't begin to describe the atrocities
that are put into words in Christopher
Simpson's new book blowback but it's
very clear that as we said as he said
just a few moments ago that a lot of the
information about the Soviet High
Command came from top-notch German
intelligence officers who went to the
Eastern Front and debriefed POWs of war
and and used that information to develop
a sense of what the Russian High Command
was like in the process of course those
POWs were starved to death I they were
used as information sources and just
like the Jews tossed away at the end or
I'm sorry the Jews weren't even used in
that capacity they were just tossed away
to begin with I would develop if you
will the Galen organization sure who is
Reinhard Galen anyway Galen was the
United States main source of information
on the USSR and particularly on the
Soviet Red Army throughout the Cold War
and this puts him in an extraordinarily
important and pivotal position because
here we are really learning about the
Soviet Union from 1945 on because we
knew very little about the Soviet Union
prior to that time and our teacher
during this time is a man who has a
clear ideological agenda of extreme
hostility to the Soviet Union and I'm
not just talking about being an
anti-communist I'm talking about a man
who was personally involved in war
crimes and secondly who considered it
his own mission to eradicate the Soviet
Union and yet this is the person that we
relied upon for the large majority of
our intelligence about the Soviet Union
in the Red Army
now what was Galen's role during the war
one of the most Galen was a very
successful intelligence officer during
the war I mean to the degree that the
Germans were successful at all
you know kind of the proofs in the
pudding here I mean the Germans lost so
I couldn't have been all that successful
but you know with that caveat he was
pretty good at his job and what did he
do for his job well
in the opening months of the war the
German army captured somewhere between
three and four million Soviet POWs and
it herded them in two camps and it quite
intentionally and very systematically
starved these people to death over a
period of about two years now
Galen's role in this is that he would go
into these camps his men were primarily
interrogators who would gather
information about the Soviet Union about
the position of the Red Army at the
front and how they were equipped and
which units were where and this type of
information from these POWs and torture
was used in in at some times but more
you know more commonly frankly was the
systematic starvation in the camps and
the people would some people anyway
would cooperate with the Nazis in the
hopes of not being starved to death
Gailen also ran a variety of covert -
missions against the Soviets behind the
lines mission sabotage and and this type
of thing involving people who were
recruited out of these camps but in this
sense his role in these starvation camps
is important it's because it's somewhat
similar to the role of concentration
camp doctors you know you had the Joseph
Mengele of the world who did suppose
it's scientific research on on how
quickly it would take a human being to
die if they were immersed in freezing
sea water or something well what is that
that's the extraction of data from the
destruction of human beings well what is
Galen doing he's extracting data from
the destruction of human beings and on a
mass scale yet after the war he was
considered too valuable to simply be
brought to trial as a war criminal and
still less to be turned over to the
Soviets now the Soviets wanted this guy
I really bad it's because in their eyes
he had been responsible for this
starvation campaign but instead we hired
him and protected him now the Russians
knew this was going on even if the
American people didn't so you had the
creation of a situation at the early
conferences in the immediate wake of the
war the Potsdam Conference and there was
a variety of other similar conferences
in which the diplomats on both sides the
Russian diplomats the American diplomats
would sit at the table and they would
make a variety of proposals to each
other and both sides were trying to
appraise well how sincere is the other
side are these people playing straight
with us and they would look beyond the
table and they would see that we were
hiring Gailen right a man who they
considered to be a major war criminal
and who they considered with some
justification to be very dangerous to
them so that their perception of
America's role in these negotiations was
was immediately undermine there was
immediate establishment of mistrust
there and this mistrust escalated and
escalated and to became an important
component of the Cold War
while the rationale for recruiting
people like Galen and some of his
cohorts from six and a meal Ellsberg you
mentioned in the book while the
recruitment of Galen and his cohorts was
intended to provide good and solid
information with regard to the Red Army
the Soviet High Command
it's not at all clear that that was
indeed the result and in a chapter
called eyes and ears you discuss in
ironic detail maybe I'll use those words
how the intelligence information
provided by Galen and colleagues in fact
blows back maybe that's certainly maybe
that's how I want to introduce the term
blowback its covert operations abroad
which have real effects on the
home country and let us take a look at
how Galen's intelligence network shaped
Cold War to our detriment right right
well for example in the immediate
aftermath of the Cold War US Army the
United States undertook something called
the strategic bombing survey and and
what this was was basically a survey of
where American planes had dropped bombs
in Europe during the war to see what was
the effect of these bombing missions and
this survey was incidentally and not
entirely officially used to collect
information on what the Soviets were up
to inside the Russian occupation zone
fine and it discovered several different
things that are of importance first of
all they discovered that the Russians
were tearing up the German rail network
that ran from the Russian occupation
zone in the east to the western
occupation the American and British
occupation zone in the West and the
Soviets were tearing up these railroads
and shipping them back to the Soviet
Union his war reparations it's because
of the destruction that the Nazis had
had wrecked inside the USSR okay this is
important because the Red Army in 1945
was largely a horse-drawn army they did
not have a large motorized Corps and
when they move their troops to the front
they move them on railroad trains so
here you have the Red Army not building
railroad trains - excuse me railroad
lines that would make it easier to move
Russian troops to the West for a
blitzkrieg style attack or whatever but
actually tearing them up so this is a
pretty clear indication to the Americans
that the Soviets had no intention of
attacking Western Germany you know any
time soon however gaiwan had a
ideological commitment to a very
aggressive portrayal of the Soviet Union
and in less than 18 months after this
the conclusion that the Americans
reached with their own resources that
the Soviets were not about
attack what had happened in the wake of
that is that some of the American troops
have been demobilized some of the
Russian troops had also been demobilized
at the same time the defense budget in
the United States was being cut okay
there was a crisis at the Pentagon they
were concerned about their budget for
1948 so the intelligence people at the
Pentagon wired to general clay who was
at the time the main US military officer
in western Germany and said that we've
got a crisis on our hands we need to
scare the Congress out of their wits in
order to get the necessary funding for
next year's budget and clay in turn
turned to Galen the very same Soviet
forces that clay himself had agreed only
months before were incapable of tack of
attacking West Germany and were in fact
completely tied down with the job of
just maintaining civil order in the
areas under the in the Russian
occupation zone these very same forces
were changed in their definitions all of
a sudden these became fresh assault
troops that were armed and equipped and
ready to go to war and that the the
Soviets at this stage were supposedly
right on the verge of attacking West
Germany so clay uses this information
from Galen sends a telegram back to
Washington that says in effect I'm
afraid that a Soviet attack might come
at any time
the telegram is of course promptly
leaked to the press and where it becomes
a you know a big war scare in in 1948
and while most people don't under you
know are not aware of this today the
fact is is that this was a very
important watershed in east-west
relations it's because it was the the
final it led to the final nails in the
coffin as far as US Soviet the
possibilities for more or less normal
us-soviet relations in Europe any time
during the next thirty years
I want to deal with that piece by piece
and hope that I give myself enough time
and you enough time to do that we're
talking with Christopher Simpson author
of a new book called blowback America's
recruitment of Nazis and its effects on
the Cold War
it's a publication of wide infilled and
Nicolson new york-based publisher before
we look at some more of the implications
of what we've got here I just want to
there's a there's an anecdote in that
there's a well-developed story and in
that chapter called eyes and ears that
looks at a figure named Rahm back you an
army intelligence man named John Graham
Beck and the the remnants if you will of
the Office of Strategic Services
information group called research and
analysis the RNA group and there are
techniques that grown back uses against
the OSS RNA group that are to be echoed
in the years to come most most most
famously of course by Joe McCarthy it's
a well known technique describe it to us
and and and how what are the same it's
basically the smear technique you know I
mean it's it's an old story
Graham Beck is a fascinating character
and a fascinating story I was able to
get his army intelligence dossier
through the Freedom of Information Act
plus a variety of other material on
ground lock and by the way the the CIA
hates mr. gromek to this day and is one
of the few people that they're willing
to criticize anyway here's the story
during the war there was a conflict you
know there's this kind of this myth that
intelligence agencies American or in
somebody else's are monolithic holes
that they operate as single monolithic
conspiracies that they have a single
point of view and so forth this is not
really true what you see inside of an
intelligence agency is a very
politicized organization with different
factions that fight amongst themselves
for for the the authority to lead the
organization and also over political
analysis okay in the immediate post-war
period you had a particularly intensify
it's because the Pentagon's intelligence
agency in particularly intelligence
analysis which in which mr. Graham Bach
was quite influential was in conflict
with the OSS 'as intelligence analysis
group and the OSS is intelligence
analysis group was somewhat better
informed than the Pentagon's and had a
somewhat more objective interpretation
of what the Soviets were up to what
Grumbach did was he began collecting
dirt about this RNA research and
analysis section of the OSS and these
were the people who specialized in
making sense out of all the hundreds and
even thousands of intelligence reports
that flow into Washington each day
gronbach didn't like RNA they were too
liberal for him as as he saw it so he
started collecting dirt on these people
and when it came to a showdown in the
months leading up to the formal
establishment of the CIA gronbach leaked
derogatory information about the RNA
analysts to a variety of right-wing
congressmen on Capitol Hill and also to
some newspapers which led them to take
the USS as a capability to analyze what
the Soviets were up to and break it up
into seventeen different committees and
spread them all over Washington and
anyone who's dealt with a Washington
Washington bureaucracy will tell you
that so when you break up an agency like
that it's the kiss of death they are
unable to function together this was
happening at exactly the same time that
Galen was coming into his own over in
Europe so you have these two parallel
motions one were hiring Galen in Europe
were relying on him for better than 70%
of all the information that we had on
the Soviet Union during this crucial
period it meanwhile in Washington there
is a purge going on within the
intelligence agencies themselves in
which anybody who was heaven forbid
illiberal was being boo
out of these organizations and mr.
Graham Bach was pushing his particular
guys forward and the net result of this
is that there emerged in the early years
of the Truman administration a consensus
a cold war consensus and an
understanding that you had to be a that
that hardcore anti-communism was the
only orthodoxy that would be acceptable
in Washington and that if you had
different ideas you would either lose
your job or there was no point in
applying for a job in the first place
okay now mr. Graham Bach remained around
for for some time and became involved in
some really quite extraordinary stuff
during his several years after this
episode this purge episode that we were
just discussing the CIA which by then
had been established hired gronbach in a
network that he continued to maintain as
a source of information about Europe and
some of the people in gronbach's Network
included Russian extreme right-wing
elements who have collaborated with the
Nazis during the war some Hungarians who
had been part of the axis government of
Hungary and a German SS general by the
name of Karl Wolfe who's a major war
criminal who was eventually convicted in
West German courts of leading a murder
program that took the lives of almost
300 thousand people these were the guys
who are on gronbach's payroll grandma
can turn was on the CIA's payroll CIA
was paying him about a million dollars a
year to get information well but
gronbach was a very ambitious guy and he
wanted to be director of the CIA and he
favored a even more aggressive and
hostile approach to dealing with the
Soviets than the CIA did so when
gronbach went to the CIA and he wanted
more money from them he wanted more
power when the agency would not give him
what he wanted he began collecting dirt
on the CIA and on various CIA officials
and state department officials
who were for the most part connected to
the what is typically known as the
eastern liberal establishment
you know the Harvard group Yale the kind
of Princeton type experts who were very
influential in both the CIA and the
State Department in that period gronbach
didn't like them neither did Joe
McCarthy when the CIA wouldn't give
gronbach as much money and power as he
wanted he took these files to Joe
McCarthy leaked them to Joe McCarthy and
at that point they McCarthy used them to
purge a variety of liberals that who
were definitely cold war liberals who
didn't like the Soviets one bit but who
were not as right wing as McCarthy
McCarthy used the data to purge these
people from the administration and and I
think this is an example of blowback and
how blowback works because here you have
the very people who were picking up the
tab for gronbach's activities ended up
getting it in the neck from Joe McCarthy
well said I want to look at this Cold
War consensus it's building in the
Truman administration there's a central
figure of remains alive to this day
George Kennan who develops the
containment policy and it's clear that
part of the containment policy with
regard to the Union associate Soviet
Socialist Republic republics includes
the use of covert operators to harass
and the Soviets on their home front and
it is under a series of programs that
are developed to train and organize
these nationalistic groups from the
Soviet Union it's it's an it's under a
series of programs to organize and train
these folk that the containment policy
at least as far as Christopher Simpsons
description of it is implemented what
happens there Chris well you know
another way to ask the same question is
I mean is to say and and for example on
on some other radio stations I've been
asked this very directly I mean the
question is well we really hated Nazis
didn't we what are we hiring these guys
for didn't we know that who they were
this is how it worked you know Nazis
didn't kind of come into the room with a
swastika I'm talking about after the war
now you know with a swastika on their
sleeve and you know you have some
government officials saying oh gee well
let's hire us a bunch of Nazis and go to
war against the Russians didn't work
like that here's how it worked is in mid
1948 there was a decision of the
National Security Council and it's known
by the code number NSC 10/2 it's just a
code number and in it this was a secret
declaration of war against the USSR and
it says quite explicitly that the United
States will undertake guerrilla war
against the Soviet Union
sabotage covert operations economic
sabotage of various types this was
unknown to the public at the time and in
fact the very existence of this decision
would be unknown to this day except for
some of the scandals that came out of
Watergate were so profound that the
existence of this decision was finally
pushed into the into the public domain
okay that's point number one there was
this declaration of covert warfare point
number two is there was a second
decision that happened shortly
thereafter the code number of that is
NSC xx and what that was was it's known
as the containment doctrine it's a a
description of how what was the basic
strategy of the Americans for dealing
with the Soviets during that period and
it says a couple interesting things
first of all it says that they wanted to
avoid an all-out war they wanted to
avoid a military type shooting war what
they wanted to do instead was to contain
the Soviet Union to bring it around with
hostile States and to to restrict the
Soviets to the maximum degree possible
and to contribute to the internal
stresses and strains inside the Soviet
Union and most particularly to the
ethnic stresses and strains inside the
Soviet Union which at times are quite
profound until an into to boil them in
this pot so to speak until the Soviets
either
agreed to cooperate with the American
agenda for for International Affairs or
collapsed into an internal civil war
inside their own country and in that
context there's a very interesting
passage it says there's a number of
different emigrate groups emigrate
political groups who wish to return to
power in the Soviet Union any one of
which we in other words the Americans
would prefer to be in power than the
present government but they continued
we're not going to make we're not going
to favor one of these groups over the
other we're going to support all of
these groups that seek to overthrow
Stalin and support them more or less
equally with money political influence
contacts guns if necessary so forth well
that decision in the world of 1948 had
had a very clear meaning it meant that
these same collaborators that had worked
with Berlin during the war the same
people who had been mayors and police
chiefs and newspaper publishers as
quislings to the Nazis during the war
who had fled back to Germany with the
retreating German army at the end of the
war that's who these people were who
wanted to return to power in the Soviet
Union that's who they were talking about
their names to some of these
organizations are the Ukrainian a UN
organization of Ukrainian nationalists
among a people of Russian ethnic
heritage there's an extremist
organization called the NTS which is
roughly translated as the National Union
of solid arists or this is the way they
like to translate it today in during the
Nazi period it the translation was much
closer to a National Socialist Union
anyway also among these groups are SS
squadrons from particularly from Latvia
Lithuania Estonia these are Baltic
countries to the northern part of the
Soviet Union so that in in our
decision-making process we didn't sit
down particularly at the high levels we
didn't sit down and frankly say what was
underway what we said what we did is
developed a series of
rationales and a kind of verbal
smokescreens really that permitted us to
sponsor these people without admitting
who exactly they were these immigrated
groups are dealt with extensively in a
new book called blowback America's
recruitment of Nazis and its effects on
the Cold War by Christopher Simpson
who's an investigative reporter and
consultant I think if I really remember
the the dust jacket that consultant on
some some script work that was done in
this area some sure creative work that
was done in this area and we don't have
time to look at we barely been able to
touch if you will the subject matter at
hand but I want to point out that there
I want to ask some opinion questions to
close with but I shall I will note that
there are marvelous chapters on the
immigration of a lot of the emigrate
groups to the United States that there's
a marvelous chapter called gorillas for
World War three in which the role of
these emigres groups are integrated into
a master plan that include strategic
that is nuclear bombing missions and
then the the parachuting of these
emigrate groups in that the emigres
groups in fact were trained in Fort
Bragg North Carolina and that's the
development really of America's special
forces program that continues of course
to this day there are marvelous chapters
called rat lines and pipelines that talk
about vatican role in bringing the
emigres groups to the United States not
by any means to oversimplify a very
complex subject there I don't mean to
say the Vatican participated blindly
thing they knew and they have another
interview I hope I hope so but I want to
we don't we have about 10-15 minutes
left here Christopher and I want to ask
some opinion questions because I think
the book blowback is of such
significance but it raises if you will
some questions which in terms of public
policy need to be need to be looked at
and maybe just a simple one
how difficult is it or has it been to
reverse the kind of Cold War policy that
we've come up with and isn't is that not
necessary it's been very difficult part
of what transpired in these programs was
in the early 1950s there was a decision
to bring a substantial number of these
extreme right-wing white right-wing
emigrate groups to the United States and
to support them here with the money and
contacts with government officials and
support them in various lobbying
campaigns and so forth now what you see
today is that the extreme right-wing has
a measure of real political power in the
United States they don't control the
country exclusively but nonetheless
there you simply look at the white house
look at Patrick Buchanan and so forth
the extreme right-wing white right wing
has a substantial influence in some
quarters well then let's have a look at
the at these groups the extremists on
the right who are they where do they
come from and what you see is that many
of these same extremists emigrate
political organizations from Eastern
Europe continue to play a substantial
role in the radical right in the United
States and in that way they play a role
in international affairs and this isn't
you know just me talking I mean for
example Senator Charles Mathias writing
in foreign affairs specifically pointed
out some of the CIA's although he
doesn't acknowledge that they're CIA
programs but some of these right-wing
emigrate programs as playing a very
substantial role in obstructing
east-west trade initiatives in
obstructing initiatives such as they
were during the Kennedy and Johnson
administration to establish better
east-west ties into to cool out or at
least manage better than nuclear weapons
race a more recent example the salt 2
treaty okay now what happened there and
this is a complicated story but
basically what happened is that there's
an organization in wash
that's called the American security
council and this is generally regarded
as one of the most effective Pro
armament pro-military lobby groups in
Washington DC they collect tens of
thousands of dollars from major military
contractors and when they hand out that
money to congressional campaigns who to
congressmen who vote in favor of a
variety of military spending bills now
that organization
it was the lead organization in
attempting to stop the assault two
treaty and it created something it was
called the Coalition for peace through
strength which was the a coalition of a
broad number of largely right-wing
organizations that were opposed to this
treaty with the Soviet Union and they
published their membership lists or at
least the member the names of the member
organizations in the Coalition for peace
through strength and you can go down
that list and you will see that between
15 and 20 percent of the organizations
in this coalition are these the same
extremist emigres groups from Eastern
Europe Slovakian World Congress and this
type of thing that here's a here's an
organization which still in the 1970s
and 80s publishes magazines that praise
Joseph T so who was a Nazi Quisling in
Slovakia whose administration during the
war took the lives of 70,000 people
including many children and yet he's a
hero to these people similar groups
among Croatian emigrates to this country
Ukrainians and so forth now you know
it's important not to imply and not to
think that simply because a person is
from Eastern Europe that they're somehow
tied up with one of these extremist
groups that's not the case at all but
the fact of the matter is that these
extremist groups of their fringe groups
of the right do play a substantial role
in Eastern European communities in this
country and then they do play a role in
right-wing lobby groups such as the
American Security Council and that group
using money from major corporations
plays a very substantial role in Capitol
Hill we've got a fewer minutes than I
thought we had left but I do want to
ask you on a closing note one of the one
of the points of the book blow back is a
plea for a discussion and disclude well
a disclosure of information long held
higher than secret very classified in
order for the public certainly for
journalists to introduce the subject to
the public but for the public to be able
to talk about the effects of these
blowback and they blowback effects of
these programs that were brought that
have existed from the Second World War
to to Vietnam and now in Central America
even is your own work going to continue
in this area is this something - are you
kind of a national security reporter I'm
working on a new project that deals with
the United Nations war crimes Commission
files that will touch on some of these
same issues but I think there's quite a
bit to be done by many different people
and I'm certainly not the only person
who's made a contribution in this field
there's a half a dozen other journalists
who have been very active writing about
this stuff for some time I think one
small thing that it's worth considering
here is well what about the argument
that we had to do this you know what
about the argument that you know well
maybe we don't like Nazis but the world
is not a nice place and sometimes you do
things with unpleasant people it's a
fair question
it seems to me how much time we got just
seconds two minutes oh okay fine um it
seems to me that if you're going to make
the argument that we had to do this that
we had to hire these Nazis and
collaborators then you have to show
something that they produced that we
couldn't have gotten anywhere else
something that they produced that was so
uniquely valuable that it justified
laying aside the basic traditions and
the basic even the laws of our country
and the fact of the matter is is that
that doesn't exist in other words these
programs even when you lay aside any
kind of moral objection to hiring Nazis
even when you lay aside any
political critique of extreme
anti-communism when you lay it all aside
and and you look at simply what did they
produce they did not produce a heck of a
lot in the cost Barbie affair here's a
guy whose chief of the Gestapo and the
old France deported Jewish children to
death camps he was some supposedly
somebody we just had to have his dossier
and much of his dossier is open today
you can look at what he produced what
did he get he collected leaflets of
communist meetings write leaflets are
handed out on the streets he came up
with a a membership list of a of a
left-wing organization in a minor town
in Germany he collected gossip that was
current among a right-wing emigrate
groups of the day this is the kind of
stuff that we were getting from these
people plus misinformation yes right
right as in the Gailen case christopher
simpson our guest on KPFK I'm Alan Fong
we've been talking about Chris's latest
book it's called blowback America's
recruitment of Nazis and its effects on
the Cold War it's a publication of Wyden
Feld and Nicolson new york-based group
and we thank you very much we hope to
have you back good it's been a pleasure